# Abstract


Brain age gap estimation (BrainAGE) is a putative ageing biomarker that aims to identify the onset of pathological ageing of the brain and monitor its progress. Diagnosing age-related brain conditions in a preclinical stage could enable early interventions, decreasing the disease burden. BrainAGE emerges as a promising ageing biomarker that seems to tackle biological ageing mechanisms. Its value is sensitive to lifestyle activities and numerous pathological conditions.
 
BrainAGE primarily models healthy brain ageing as a way to detect pathological deviations. Healthy brain ageing can be modelled by machine learning algorithms that learn ageing patterns from structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data. The BrainAGE provides information about the difference between the predicted and the chronological age. A wide range of approaches have been considered to model brain age, from shallow to deep learning. However, current models lack generalisation when applied to data obtained in acquisition settings different from those used to train the model. Moreover, BrainAGE is sensitive to detecting changes in multiple diseases but lacks specificity, which might be essential for its adoption in clinical practice. This thesis aimed to improve the BrainAGE generalisability and specificity.

One hypothesis for the generalisability problem is that MRI data may contain scanner artefacts, which leads to a bias in machine learning models towards acquisition settings. Preprocessing has a preponderant role in reducing scanner artefacts. Nevertheless, there is no preprocessing gold standard in neuroimaging. FreeSurfer and SPM emerge as two frameworks that are extensively used in BrainAGE. The first study in this thesis assessed the reproducibility between the FreeSurfer and computational anatomy toolbox (CAT12), an SPM toolbox for structural data, and the reliability of each one. The results outlined that the reliability of the frameworks differs, and CAT12 outperformed FreeSurfer. Therefore, CAT12 was selected to preprocess the data.

Overfitting to training data could also cause the generalisability problem. Deep learning is extensively applied in the BrainAGE field with state-of-the-art performance. Nonetheless, the performance of these models often decreases when tested on an external test set. Transfer learning from a 3D-Convolutional Autoencoder (3D-CAE), an unsupervised model, was considered to overcome this limitation. The results outlined that reusing weights from pre-trained 3D-CAE improves generalisation on an external test set. 

The specificity of BrainAGE might be improved by using multiple sources of information. The preprocessing of MRI data involves registering the image into a template. The transformations applied to overlap the two images are designated by deformation fields. Most studies use minimally preprocessed T1-weighted images, or grey matter (GM) or white matter (WM) segmented images, to predict brain age. Few studies consider deformation fields to model brain age, and results are inconsistent. One study of this thesis focuses on comprehensively comparing the performance of the deformation fields with the GM, WM and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The results outlined that deformation fields yield better performance than WM and CSF. Furthermore, combining deformation fields with GM improves performance compared to GM alone. 

Finally, the last study assessed sensitivity maps to explain the model predictions and increase BrainAGE specificity. All the previous analyses were combined. Five brain age models were trained, leveraging transfer learning from the 3D-CAE, using the following inputs: minimally processed, GM, WM, CSF and deformation results. In general, the BrainAGE was statistically significant in all models and conditions. The results evidenced model sensitivity, but lack specificity. The analysis of sensitivity maps revealed different patterns across the different diseases and input types, thus contributing to a biological explanatory framework. Explainability from multiple sources might provide insights on BrainAGE specificity.

This thesis contributed to the BrainAGE field on two axes: generalisability and specificity. The former was addressed using the preprocessing framework with higher reliability and transfer learning from an agnostic model. The latter was attained by including deformation fields in brain ageing modelling and exploring sensitivity maps for differential diagnosis. 


**Keywords** 
Ageing, Biomarker, Machine Learning, Neuroimaging	